The final place where you can
do testing and optimization and
by far the most important is
actually once you go live, right?
Once your website is live,
that is the moment where you
finally see real users interacting
with the real website in
real time in a completely
natural environment, right?
In other words,
say they're not being watched or
they've not got someone over their
shoulder watching everything they do.
They're just using the website.
And that has got the most
valuable insights appear there.
And seriously, you could double or
even triple your conversion rate by
doing some post launch optimization.
And it's a very simple step
by step process, right?
I've written in my notes, that sitting on
the screen, hammer home this point, right?
Of everything I've said today, this
little loop that I'm gonna show you now,
is the most valuable thing that you can
do to improve the conversion rate on your
existing site, right?
Don't do a big redesign cuz it'll take
forever and it will be really difficult.
Instead go through this loop again and
again, and
you will systematically
improve your website.
So this loop consists of three steps.
Step one, find a problem area to address.
So we're gonna find
an issue with the website,
a page that is underperforming, okay?
I'm gonna go into these in
more detail in a minute.
Step number two is then
to diagnose exactly what
the problem is on that page, okay?
And then step number three is
to test a number of potential
solutions to that exact problem
that we've identified, right?
So let's break that down in
a little bit more detail.
Number one, identify problem areas with
the page and how are we gonna do that?
Well, we're gonna do
it with all analytics.
Now, a lot of you guys watching
this are developers and
probably are a lot more analytical
in your thinking than I am.
To be quite honest,
I suck analytics, right?
I open up something like Google Analytics
and my eyes glaze over and
I start dribbling at
the corner of my mouth.
It's not my natural environment.
But even I am able to do the basic
stuff that is required to
identify problem pages on the website.
Because effectively there are just
two things you're looking for.
So you can do this immediately
after this session, right?
Log into Google Analytics and
look for two things.
Thing number one is exit pages.
Where are people leaving your website,
okay?
Where are they most abandoning it?
So that's the first thing
you're looking for.
Just make a list of the top five or so
pages that people
are exiting the site from.
And then secondly,
look at your bounce pages.
So these are pages where someone
is going to the page and
then within first few seconds,
first 20 seconds, are leaving the page.
And actually, you wanna take off people
that are spending less than about five
seconds on the page.
Because those people aren't even
really looking at the page properly.
So in those situations, it's not
necessarily the page that's wrong but
they didn't mean to go click
on the link or whatever.
But people that are staying
between say 5 and 20 seconds and
then abandoning, that means there's
probably a problem on the page.
So it's pages where people
are completely leaving the site and
pages where they're not
spending very long on a page.
So those are the two things you
wanna look at in your analytics.
And that will give you a list of pages
that are potential problem pages.
And then you just pick the worst, right?
You look at the one with the highest
bounce rate or the highest exits and
you start with that.
That's gonna be the page we're gonna
first of all improve and iterate upon.
So once we've done that, we can then
look specifically at that page.
Now, earlier I talked about
the Microsoft Clarity as a tool and
we're gonna use that to narrow
down the problem, right?
So what we do is we run Microsoft Clarity,
or if you've already got Hotjar,
that will do the same on the page,
on that particular page.
You don't tend to have it running across
the whole site because these tools begin
to interfere with performance if you
leave them running on everything.
So we're just gonna use it for as long
as we need it on that particular page.
And that's gonna produce
some session videos, right,
of people interacting with that page.
We're gonna see people scrolling up and
down the page.
We're gonna see people clicking on things,
all that kind of stuff.
Now, if you do, you can if you want,
run it across the site more broadly.
And then Microsoft Clarity will provide
you with some analytics on things like
number of people rage clicking or
quickly going back from a page bouncing
from a page and things like that.
So you can always use it as a replacement
for Google Analytics, but personally,
I prefer Google Analytics.
But what you're really looking for from
Microsoft Clarity is you're looking for
some sessions that you can play back and
watch people moving around the page.
And it'll also give you some heat maps.
So I'll show you what people are scrolling
to, what they're seeing on the page,
what they're not.
And so you can use this to kind of work
out what may be going wrong with the page.
So for example,
people are scrolling past some critical
piece of content without reading it.
Are they trying to click on
something that's not clickable?
Are they missing a call
to action entirely?
That kind of stuff.
So after watching a few of those
videos and looking at the heat maps,
you'll begin to have an inkling
of what might be going wrong.
And now hopefully inspire in
you some potential solutions,
right, how do you might fix it.
If you really have
watched those videos and
you still got no clue of what's
going wrong with a page.
Get people to do some usability
testing where you ask them to complete
a task that involves going
through that page, right,
in order to see where
things are going wrong.
And ask them once they've been through the
page, did you spot this piece of content?
Or get them to speak out loud
any problems you have and
you'll be able to narrow down the problem.
Once you've narrowed down the problem,
the next stage is to come up with
some solutions that hopefully
will fix the problem and test it.
So there's kind of how you test your
solutions is somewhat dependent on what
the solution involves.
So there's basically two types
of ideas you'll come up with.
There'll be really quick and
simple things that are things like, well,
if we change the heading or if we rename
the button or if we change the color or
maybe if we swap out that image,
basic stuff like that, right?
And then there'll be more complex stuff
which might mean involving some functional
changes, like we are gonna remove capture
from the form or that kind of thing.
For the really simple stuff,
the best solution you can use
is you can run A/B testing.
Now, if you've never run A/B
testing before, it really,
really is incredibly straight forward.
Chances are you've already got it set
up on your website and just don't know.
Because if you've got Google Analytics,
you're already set up with,
they used to call it Google Optimize.
But I think it's now got a new fancy name.
But if you search Google Optimize,
you'll come up with it.
And basically, it's really, really simple
if you've never done A/B testing before,
based on the majority of your traffic
will still go to your original version.
Say the page with your
original headline or whatever.
And then you'd have various
variations where you may be changing
your page in slightly different ways.
You might change the heading, you might
have different headings that you test,
that kind of stuff.
I'm sure you're familiar with A/B testing.
One area that does cause confusion is
the difference between AB testing and
multi-variant testing.
A lot of people get that really confused.
Because everybody thinks that
multi-variant testing is when you test
multiple versions.
So this screen here we've
got three variations,
people think that's multi-variant but
it's actually not.
Multi-variant testing is where
you're testing multiple variations.
So you're changing multiple
things across the page.
So A/B testing, you could have
you're making a single change.
You might be changing the headline
in five different ways,
trying five different headlines.
Multi-variant testing is where you're
changing the headline and the bottom.
You're changing more than one
thing on a page at a time.
And you can do all of this really
simply just through a WYSIWYG editor,
it can't be much easier to do.
You just go in, you edit whatever it is
you wanna edit with a different version,
maybe a different headline or whatever.
Save it,
that becomes a variation job done.
If you've got a big website with
a lot of traffic going to it,
A/B testing is an absolute must.
And as you wanna explore as many
different versions as possible.
So don't just say you wanna change
your headline, don't just do one
old version of that alternative
version of the headline, do 5 or 6.
The reason being is the more versions you
do, the more chances are you're gonna hit
on one that creates a really
big jump in conversion, right?
Which is obviously what we want.
The problem is that a lot of people
don't have high traffic websites,
have quite low traffic websites.
And so they go, well,
I can't do A/B testing then, right?
Cuz you have to be Amazon or
booking.com or someone like that,
to do that kind of testing.
And that isn't strictly true, you just
need a slightly different approach to it.
So one option for
a start is you don't do lots of variations
because every variation
has to drive people to it.
And that means that obviously fewer
of people are going to any particular
version.
And that means it takes
longer to declare a winner.
So you wanna test maybe just one
alternative if you've got a low traffic
website.
Also the problem that you can have
is often there's a big gap between,
this is really hard to explain, one day
I'll workout how to explain it well.
You'll have a big gap between
the point you're testing and
the point of conversion.
So let's say for example you wanted
to test variations of a product name.
And whether changing the product name
is gonna lead to more sales, right?
Now, if you have got a low
converting site, then so
they're on the product page and
they see an alternate
version of the product name.
Now, there's quite a long time,
lots of pages where they
could potentially drop out.
So they might add it to their basket but
then drop out the basket.
They might go from the basket
to the checkout but
not enter their address information.
They might dropout at the credit card
conversion or any other number of points.
And so as a result,
you need a lot of traffic to be able to
confirm that from enough people
to get to the final step to
know whether the new product
name is working or not.
So the way that you can get around
this problem is by shortening
the distance between the point of
conversion and the page being tested.
So instead of testing whether people,
if you change the product name,
do they get all the way to check out.
Where they've actually bought it, you can
test with did they add it to their basket.
And that can be your
conversion point instead.
So it's much closer between the two.
So how do you go about dealing with that?
Well, that's one is to close the gap.
The other issue just wait, right?
So you wait till you've had enough
traffic that goes to the site and
eventually, Google will declare a winner.
And you just have to wait longer,
but who's got time for that?
Second is you reduce the thresholds.
So, in other words, you close, what you do
is you go, well, okay, Google is saying
it can't declare a statistical winner yet
of which of the different options.
But I can see from looking at
it that that one's doing better.
And so I'm gonna declare a winner myself
rather than waiting for the stats.
And then the third one is this
idea of closing the gap to make
the testing more reliable.
Most of the time, to be honest on low
testing websites, all just go in and go,
well, look, that one's doing pretty well.
I'm pretty confident
that that's the winner,
even if Google doesn't
declare it the winner.
That's normally good enough for me.
So the, sorry,
I shouldn't quite move on to that.
So that's great for
testing small little stuff like that.
If you're trying to test bigger stuff,
so maybe you're making changes to
the checkout process as a whole or adding
new functionality or something like that,
then normally that's where
you wanna do prototype.
You wanna mock it up as a clickable
prototype in something like Figma or
something like that.
It's relatively quick and
easy compared to coding it.
And then you just wanna run some
basic usability testing on that and
see how people respond.
Because that you're not gonna
be able to do with A/B testing.
And so between those two types of testing,
you can really begin to solve a problem.
And then when you solve one problem,
you found a solution that gets
a higher conversion rate.
You tick it off, you go back to your
list of poor performing pages and
you pick the next one.
And then you rinse and repeat
the process again and again and again.
And that's how you improve
conversion on your website.
And you'll see bigger conversion rate by
doing that than anything else that you
could do.